
--- Page 1 ---
International Journal of Computing and Digital Systems
ISSN (2210-142X)
Int. J. Com. Dig. Sys. 15, No.1 (Mar-24)
http://dx.doi.org/10.12785/ijcds/150178
Open Research Issues and Tools for Visualization and Big Data
Analytics
Rania Mkhinini Gahar1,2, Olfa Arfaoui1,3 and Minyar Sassi Hidri4
1National Engineering School of Tunis, University of Tunis El Manar, Tunisia
2OASIS Research Laboratory
3RISC Research Laboratory
4Computer Department, Deanship of Preparatory Year and Supporting Studies, Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University, Dammam,
Saudi Arabia
Received 21 May 2023, Revised 29 Jan. 2024, Accepted 7 Feb. 2024, Published 1 Mar. 2024
Abstract: The new age of digital growth has marked all fields. This technological evolution has impacted data flows which have
witnessed a rapid expansion over the last decade that makes the data traditional processing unable to catch up with the rapid flow
of massive data. In this context, the implementation of a big data analytics system becomes crucial to make big data more relevant
and valuable. Therefore, with these new opportunities appear new issues of processing very high data volumes requiring companies
to look for big data-specialized solutions. These solutions are based on techniques to process these masses of information to facilitate
decision-making. Among these solutions, we find data visualization which makes big data more intelligible allowing accurate illustrations
that have become accessible to all. This paper examines the big data visualization project based on its characteristics, benefits, challenges
and issues. The project, also, resulted in the provision of tools surging for beginners as well as well as experienced users.
Keywords: Big Data, DataViz, Cloud, Big Data Analytics, Business Intelligence.
1. Introduction
Every day we generate 2.5 trillion bytes of data. In
fact, 90% of the world’s data was created in the past
two recent years only [1]. The data comes from different
sources such as the sensors used to collect climate in-
formation, social Media Posts, digital images, and online
videos, online Purchase, transnational records and GPS
(Global Positioning System) signals from mobile phones.
This data, which has resulted essentially from the meeting
of three elements which are Internet, social networks, and
smart devices (computers, tablets, smartphones, connected
objects...), is called big data or massive data. It is considered
very interesting according to the pertinent information that
may contain. Actually, we note that 13 of business leaders’
decisions are based on information they don’t trust or
don’t have and half of them say they don’t have access
to the information they need to do their job and 83% of
CIOs (Chief Information Officer) cite analytical business
intelligence (BI) as part of their plans to improve their
competitiveness.
Moreover, 60% of CEOs (Chief Executive Officers) need
to improve the capture and understanding of information in
order to make decisions more faster [2]. For example, data
could be analyzed to i) detect customer feelings and reac-
tions or critical or life-threatening conditions in hospitals
to intervene in time; ii) predict weather patterns to plan the
optimal use of wind turbines and make decisions based on
transactional data in real-time; iii) identify criminals and
threats from videos, sounds and data streams; iv) studying
student reactions during a lesson and predict which ones
will succeed in the basis of statistics and models gathered
over the years (big data in the education field).
Research on big data analytics is entering a new phase
called fast data where multiple gigabytes of data arrive in
the big data systems every second [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8].
Modern big data systems collect inherently complex data
streams due to the 3 basic Vs which are Volume, Velocity,
and Variety and to which are added Veracity, Validity,
Vulnerability, Volatility, Visualization which consequently
give rise to the 10Vs [9] of big data. The well-designed big
data systems must be able to deal with all 10Vs effectively
by creating a balance between data processing objectives
and cost (i.e., computational, financial, and programming
efforts). Data collection and storage capabilities have al-
lowed researchers in diverse domains to collect and observe
a huge amount of data. However, large data sets present
substantial challenges to existing data analysis tools [10].
E-mail address: rania.mkhininigahar@enit.rnu.tn, olfa.arfaoui@isln.u-carthage.tn, mmsassi@iau.edu.sa
https://journal.uob.edu.bh

--- Page 2 ---
1104
R.Mkhinini Gahar, et al.: Open research issues and tools for visualization and big data analytics.
We will focus in our paper on one of the most important
big data’ Vs which is data visualization.
One of the most crucial and useful tools for compre-
hending corporate information is data visualization. Be-
cause of this, a picture truly is worth a thousand words.
Data has been visually represented by humans for hundreds
of years. We’ve collected data, organized it, and presented
it in maps, charts, and graphs to tell a richer and deeper
story than it may have otherwise. The data boom coincides
with the technological boom. Additionally, we have been
able to process ever-increasing volumes of data quickly
thanks to the same technology. Although they might not
be immediately apparent in the first text format, trends,
patterns, and other insights are quickly identified utilizing
data visualization software.
The most effective strategy changes to visual data dis-
plays after reports and dashboards take their place since
they can fit a lot of information into a little amount of space.
Examining the extensive data sets and graphic presentations
that enable quick and accurate translation might take hours,
days, or even weeks. Thanks to advanced technology, many
data visualization tools allow for interactive functions. This
flexibility provides the ability to switch and change quickly,
which helps the user to discover and learn about alternative
viewpoints. This comprehensive, interactive presentation
can rarely be achieved quickly by processing raw data
without visualization software. The information industry
frequently faces the difficulty of the quantitative component.
Knowing that decisions are made as a result of visual
representations requires a solid comprehension of data. In
the absence of context, visuals are ineffective. But there is
an easy target is just to let the workers and the tools perform
their jobs. As long as you utilize the appropriate tools and
the individuals conducting the data analysis are aware of
where the data originated from, who can use it, and how it
will be used. The data visualization will next be translated,
processed, and on a more clearer course for making those
important decisions. Data visualization’s significance in
the world of corporate information is being realized more
and more every day. They have the ability to not only
supply useful data but also understand how to process it,
which guarantees the organization stays competitive. This
is because they are high-performance analytics tools that
offer better ways to analyze data faster than ever before.
Visualization is critical in today’s world. Big data is
difficult to visualize. Due to in-memory technology limi-
tations and low scalability (scaling up), functionalities and
development time response, visualization tools, and current
big data are faced with technical challenges. Traditional
graphs cannot be relied upon to attempt to plot a billion data
points. We, therefore, need different ways of representing
data. If we take into account the multitude of variables
resulting from the variety and speed of big data and the
complex relationships that unite, we can see that developing
a visualization significant is not so easy.
Spreadsheets and reports stuffed full of numbers and
algorithms are far less successful at communicating mean-
ing than reports and charts that show enormous amounts
of complex data. Because of the constraints of in-memory
technology and their inadequate scalability, functionality,
and response time, current large data visualization solutions
suffer technological difficulties. When plotting a billion
data points, we can’t rely on typical graphs, thus we need
alternative methods, such as data clustering or the use of
treemaps, sunbursts, parallel coordinates, circular network
diagrams, or cone trees. [11].
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: The
DataViz’ presentations are presented in section 2. Section 3
presents its benefits. Section 4 introduces the characteristics
of such DataViz project. Section 5 discusses some DataViz
tools surging for beginners as well as well as experienced
users. Section 6 revealed the main data visualization chal-
lenges. The DataViz issues are highlighting in section 7.
Overall discussion with limitations are stated in section 8.
2. The DataViz and you: presentations
Many data scientists define data visualization in different
ways. Indeed, they agree that it is indeed a visual form to
visualize by facilitating access to it. Another data experts’
group agrees that data visualization is meaningless if it does
not encompass understanding, exploitation and decision-
making, speed, and information sharing.
A. DataViz features
The value of data visualization lies in its ability to meet
three main imperatives namely interpretable, relevant and
innovative.
•
Be interpretable: In a context where the volume of
data is exploding with the exponential growth in the
use of the Internet and in particular Google, so-called
unstructured data experiences the same evolution. But
a data visualization starting from these data which
would not be interpretable, that is to say clear, would
be useless. There must be some clarity regardless of
the volume or source of the data [12].
•
Be relevant: At a time when big data is a central issue
for companies, several techniques to process this mass
of information in a relevant way must be put in place.
Relevance is linked to interpretability. The data visu-
alization must make it possible to answer questions
in a defined context and aimed at specific objectives.
Data sources must be reliable. Data integrity is the
basis for meaningful data visualization. You must
ensure that your information is correct and up to date.
It is necessary to sort the data for optimal analysis and
to consider using all the data at your disposal. This
allows you to cross-reference information and thus
bring out a more complete analysis to better support
your digital marketing department[13].
https://journal.uob.edu.bh/

--- Page 3 ---
Int. J. Com. Dig. Sys. 15, No.1, 1103-1117 (Mar-24)
1105
•
Be innovative: Finally, data visualization is only of
interest if it brings new information, and originality,
if it gives a perspective unpublished on a subject.
It provides a different perspective, to illustrate an
analysis [14].
B. Brief history of DataViz
Originally, it was a simple human limitation that
spawned the Data Visualization approach: our brain is
simply unable to easily process large volumes of raw data to
extract useful information. Maybe we can do it occasionally,
but certainly not every time, let alone many times every day.
However, Data Visualization is not just about the graph-
ical representation of data. It is also a story that is told with
the help of these representations.
The first successful expression of this approach is a flow
map that tells the story of the Russian campaign led by
Napoleon. We owe it to the engineer Charles Joseph Minard
who represents, at the beginning of the 19th century, the
story of the colossal human losses of the Russian campaign
during which the Napoleonic army arrived in Moscow with
less than a quarter of its starting squad.
Shortly after, nurse Florence Nightingale had the idea of
using graphic representation to allow her reader to compare
facts with complex correlations [14].
She presented, for the attention of Queen Victoria, the
main causes of death of British soldiers engaged in the
Crimean War. His graphic support, dated 1858, allowed
him to eloquently highlight that epidemics were much more
devastating on the workforce than the injuries suffered in
combat. Florence Nightingale has therefore used a graphic
support of data, presented in figure 1, to communicate
information, of course, but also to convince, that is to say,
to orient the conclusion that one draws from it.
Figure 1. Florence Nightingale’s Diagram [15].
Until the 19th century, Data Visualization therefore
evolved through isolated, independent attempts, which ex-
plored both the possible fields of application and the pos-
sible graphical approaches. In other words, the discipline
was forging a vocabulary but it still lacked common rules
– that is to say, a grammar.
This grammar was laid down by Jacques Bertin who in
1967 developed the real bases of graphic language.
In figure 2, Jacques Bertin defined graphic semiology,
i.e. the elements that can be modified in a Data Visualization
to represent information. Identifying and clearly defining
these graphic variables (color, size, surface) was simply the
grammar that was missing from the graphic language.
Figure 2. Jacques Bertin’s graphic semiology [16].
It is by applying these new – but common – rules
that we have gradually managed to remove superfluous
graphic elements and define what characterizes a relevant
data visualization.
C. The DataViz is pretty, but what is it for?
Data visualization concerns a wide range of business
sectors. If we stick to our panel, several areas are repre-
sented, namely consumer goods, business services, industry,
media, marketing and advertising, scientific research, public
service, telecom, transport, logistics, etc... All companies
use data visualization either to do certain things they
were already doing better (optimization), or to enrich their
activity with value-added tasks (innovation). In terms of
optimization, DataViz allows, for example, to Lagard`ere
Active to accelerate the production of its reports and
STMicroelectronics to make its manufacturing process more
efficient;
In the area of innovation, PagesJaunes discovers and
rectifies, thanks to data visualization, the shortcomings of
its indexing, Voyages-sncf.com launches a new innovative
service (Mytripset), Alcatel Lucent imagines the mobile
applications of tomorrow, etc.
D. Dual purpose of optimization/innovation
More specifically, 5 use cases illustrating this dual
purpose optimization and innovation: the use of DataViz
to:
https://journal.uob.edu.bh/

--- Page 4 ---
1106
R.Mkhinini Gahar, et al.: Open research issues and tools for visualization and big data analytics.
•
Improve the company management: One of the first
uses of data visualization is to contribute to more
effective management of activity and performance,
oriented towards action.
In our modern economy, all directions need to man-
age their organizations as finely as possible by relying
on numerous and rich data and by producing relevant
dashboards.
”A picture is worth a thousand words” and nowadays
”the image takes precedence often on words” [17].
Data visualization is the art of telling figures in
creative and gameful way [18].
•
Improve the customer relationship: Marketing and
customer relationship management are two functions
of choice for data visualization. We visualize cus-
tomer data to improve Customer relationship man-
agement (CRM) multi-channel. In addition, DataViz
is better to qualify the customer base.
•
Define the company’s offer: At the opposite end of
the spectrum, data visualization provides companies
with tools to better define their offers. Moreover,
the exploration of collected customer data and the
ability to test different hypotheses prove particularly
valuable.
•
Contribute directly to the company business: The
DataViz serves to better understand your competitive
positioning. That’s why Data visualization could be
considered a relevant source of value and differen-
tiation which immediately identify customer post-
ponements. Here, data visualization could directly
influence the business economics model [19].
•
Empowering citizens: Data visualization also finds
its usefulness outside the walls of the company. It
can contribute to better informing the citizen and
therefore giving him the means to act.
In fact, company can allow citizens to think through
Citizen DataViz projects may take a longer turn
activist [20], [21]. This is the case, for example, of
the pariteur of France Televisions.
E. DataViz and Infographics
The Dataviz takes the information a person needs and
presents it in an easily understandable way. Infographics
are a mix of Dataviz, journalism, and marketing. They use
strategically chosen data visualizations and lexicons to ex-
plain a complex story easily. The confusion in terminology
is understandable however the terms are not interchange-
able. Both turn data into easy-to-understand visualizations.
These tools are extremely powerful when it comes to
explaining numbers in an educational way to people who
are reluctant to analyze data. This is their only common
point. Here is a definition for both forms of presentations.
Some distinction points between these two terms can take
place in Table I.
F. Main reasons for using DataViz
Three main reasons explain the use of data visualization
namely confirm or refuse hypotheses on a market, educate
and explore.
•
Confirm or refuse hypotheses on a market: The
DataViz can then take the form of a dashboard,
making it possible to decide while having a global
vision of the studied market.
•
Educate: Internally, companies use DataViz for re-
search work reporting or brainstorming sessions. It
can be a good complement to creative approaches
such as gamification.
•
Explore: This is the most futuristic aspect of data
visualization, which certainly will develop. Dataviz
can help build predictive models. We are then in the
field of data analysis
G. DataViz: buzzword or real innovation?
The data that are thus available to professionals to guide
them in their decisions are increasingly numerous and multi-
structured. But how not to be overwhelmed and make it a
real tool for reflection and decision-making? How to obtain
answers to fundamental questions whose answers are for
the moment unknown?
It is in the face of these requirements that DataViz takes
on its full meaning. The representation of data in the form
of images makes it easier to understand them. There are
several definitions of DataViz in the academic and industrial
state of the art. These different definitions all converge on
the fact that DataViz is a way to give meaning to data in
order to extract information from it and therefore exploit it.
Dataviz not only enables intellectual understanding but also
transforms a set of raw data into actionable information.
In addition, it accelerates the understanding, decision,
and action that we have just mentioned. It is also a mode of
communication, allowing data not to remain confined to the
world of BI or statistics but to infuse the entire organization
and become a support for decision-making and collaborative
work.
DataViz has many uses and leads to a variety of benefits
for the organization. First, it contributes to more effective
management of activity and performance, oriented towards
action. This improvement in management is manifested by
taking a step back in addition to other tools whose horizon
is in the shorter term. In other words, DataViz can be used
as a decision-making, and strategic tool, usable by a local
manager to manage his performance.
Another important use of DataViz is the reinvention of
customer service to improve its efficiency. To improve the
management and understanding of their KPIs (Key Per-
formance Indicators), SFR uses DataViz to identify causal
relationships in their data sources in order to find hidden
https://journal.uob.edu.bh/

--- Page 5 ---
Int. J. Com. Dig. Sys. 15, No.1, 1103-1117 (Mar-24)
1107
TABLE I. Infographics versus DataViz
Infographics
DataViz
Promotes the information understanding that we already know by
representing it in graphic form.
Bring out information that was unknown by analyzing data
presented in graphical form.
Modest data amount.
Huge data volume.
Good design makes a product useful.
Good DataViz makes information useful.
Good design is aesthetic.
Good Data is aesthetic.
Good design makes a product understandable.
Good DataViz makes information understandable.
Good design is honest.
Good DataViz is honest.
A didactic approach focused on others.
Self-knowledge tool.
Understanding support.
Decision support.
patterns through their main sales channels. A good customer
relationship is based on perfect knowledge of the customer
himself. What are their characteristics and behaviors? How
to segment and classify them? The exploration capabilities
in the data enabled by data visualization find their full
meaning in providing answers to these questions.
Another key point about DataViz is its ability to foster
innovation and its potential to get the business to consider
new possibilities. In particular, it is a testing ground for new
modes of interaction with users.
3. DataViz’s benefits
In a context of ever-increasing and often highly complex
volumes of data, DataViz has many advantages. Data visual-
ization is far from being an accessory intended to embellish
your website or your presentations. Synthetically, we can
say that DataViz improves the data understanding, the data
communication, the decision-making, and the ability to
innovate.
A. Dataviz makes it easier to understand data
With big data advent and the proliferation of data
sources, companies are increasingly using data visualiza-
tion. These visual representations make it easier to un-
derstand raw data and thus help in decision-making. Big
data is not merely more data; it is data that is so vast,
so varied, and collecting so quickly that typical procedures
and methodologies, including ”normal” software like Excel,
Crystal reports, or other programs, are ineffective. DataViz
makes it possible to make the most comprehensible data
important and what they mean, regardless of the audience
concerned. Its effectiveness is based on the fact that a
majority of us grasp and retain information better when it
is represented visually. The following image illustrates this
fact, which was studied by an American psychologist.
Unlike a table filled with figures, DataViz helps to
highlight information that seems complex or drowned in
a large number of parameters. The following example
illustrates this fact well. For example, we want to analyze
the life expectancy by country. Table II presents an extract
of values from the top 5 countries since the values file is
very large.
But is it ideal for ordering easily and between countries
quickly? And explain it in a few seconds to his audience?
If we transcribe this information on a map, with more or
TABLE II. Life expectancy per country.
Country
Life expectancy
ISO-code
0
Afghanistan
64.5
AFG
1
Algeria
76.7
DZA
2
Andorra
81.8
AND
3
Angola
60.8
AGO
4
Antigua and Barbuda
76.9
ATG
less bright colors depending on the strength of the index,
everything becomes clearer. We want to quickly understand
which countries have the highest rate of life expectancy.
Figure 3 allows us to assess at a glance countries with
the highest rate of life expectancy. Analyzing an Excel file
is much faster by visualization, especially if the data is large
and complex.
Figure 3. Life expectation by country (Source: Kaggle / WORLD
DATA by country (2020).
Our brain needs less than 250 milliseconds to enter (1),
understand (2), and respond (3) to information under visual
form. Whereas comparing raw data in tabular form requires
an effort of memory that quickly reaches its limits. Ulti-
mately, data visualization invites us to take up the classic
distinction between data, information, and knowledge. If
the data are unitary, raw elements, reflecting reality, the
information is their coherence to give them meaning.
B. Dataviz improves communication
Data not only reflect reality, but they also are not
just a steering lever. They are also communication tools.
Unfortunately, few of us are fluent in our language. Most of
us need an interpreter to make us penetrate the intelligence
of the data.
This is where data visualization comes in. Moreover,
Communication is the major asset of the DataViz for
https://journal.uob.edu.bh/

--- Page 6 ---
1108
R.Mkhinini Gahar, et al.: Open research issues and tools for visualization and big data analytics.
coordinate the teams. Indeed, the infinite volumes of data
stored by companies are generally only within the reach
of data analysts and other technical profiles. But once put
into images, this data is accessible to everyone without any
prior training. The support generated by DataViz makes it
possible to unify the discourse and convey unambiguous
messages. We can truly speak of democratization of access
to given [22].
C. Dataviz optimizes and accelerates decision-making
This is the logical continuation of an easier under-
standing of the data. DataViz allows the development of
interactive dashboards. Unlike static charts, such as those
in Excel, interactive DataViz allows the exploration of data
in depth, with less effort. In a few clicks, it is now possible
to release correlations between the operational actions put
in place, the performance, and their impact.
It is also much easier to compare its indicators to the
market, and competitors. Once the data has been clarified
and better identified, decision-makers can focus on the
essentials and make choices in a way more simple.
D. Dataviz promotes innovation
Finally, we cannot close this part on the benefits of data
visualization without examining its potential in terms of
innovation. Indeed, DataViz is also a field of research that
can encourage the company to consider new possibilities. In
particular, it is a testing ground for new ways of interacting
with users [23].
4. Characteristics of DataViz projects
The deployment of DataViz software is a crucial step
that must be perfectly orchestrated to guarantee the success
of the project. This later must be both fast and light [24].
A. DataViz project’s speed
The first characteristic of DataViz projects is that they
are, all in all, quick to conduct. Their big advantage is in
particular to reduce the time between the launch of the
project and the ability to show a first operational version
[21].
There are several reasons for this speed. One of them
is that DataViz projects require hardware and software
resources that interfere little with existing architectures.
They, therefore, do not require long and complex budget
validation cycles: the necessary environment can be avail-
able in a short time. Another reason is that data visual-
ization lends itself well to POC (Proof Of Concept) type
approaches experimentation, trial and error iteration loops.
Dataviz projects have a very empirical side, completely in
phase with current development approaches, such as agile
methodology, rapid Agile development, or Scrum.
B. DataViz project’s lightness
Lightness is involved in the technical resources required
which are quite light. Example: Recent technological de-
velopments, such as the development of JSON-type formats
(DS.JS3), put us in a direct connection with data. Thanks to
these formats, we can recover varied data from all horizons,
using standard applications. A real human-data interface is
thus being established.
C. Success key factors
To succeed in a data visualization project, it is nec-
essary to bring together key success factors that can be
classified into three categories. First of all, there are the
classic good practices of any project: ensuring preparation
and planning, choosing the right scope, implementing the
appropriate methodologies, etc. The second category is that
the DataViz project concerns data: their targeting, qual-
ity, respect for confidentiality, and access authorizations,
are therefore essential. Finally, of course, ergonomics and
graphic intelligence play a key role in the acceptance of
DataViz and its effective use (although, by the way, these
aspects should be part of any IT project, etc.).
1) Prepare the project well
The first secret to success is preparation. This is under-
stood on two levels: the content of the data visualization, on
the one hand, and the project approach, on the other hand.
DataViz is not a panacea and, to be useful, it must
be well thought out. On the methodological aspect, the
preparation consists of implementing establishes a process
for collecting, analyzing, and representing data that is viable
over time, but also sufficiently flexible.
2) Target data and visualizations according to the profile
of the users
A second success factor is related to the nature of the
data visualization, namely a communication tool. However,
for communicating effectively with someone, it is important
to meet his need, with clarity and in a form he understands.
Three key questions to ask yourself to choose the best
representation:
•
What question do we want to answer? All the graphs
do not make it possible to present the same analysis
(distribution, evolution, decomposition...). Hence the
importance for the designer to question his intention.
•
Who are we talking to? Is he an expert or a layman?
What should he do with the information (e.g. retain
the information for later or make an immediate deci-
sion)?
•
In what context is the interlocutor? The good re-
ception of the graphic does not only depend on the
graphic itself, but also the intellectual and visual
availability of the reader. All that the graphic designer
can do is try to anticipate this greater or lesser
availability, in order to choose the most suitable
representation.
The difficulty increases when the data visualization must
address different audiences. It is then necessary to provide
https://journal.uob.edu.bh/

--- Page 7 ---
Int. J. Com. Dig. Sys. 15, No.1, 1103-1117 (Mar-24)
1109
modes of representation adapted to each of them. This
is the case, for example, of the Belgian FPS Economy,
which communicates with both the general public and
professionals.
3) Start on small perimeters, to learn
Another good practice is to ”get your hands dirty”
on first restricted perimeters, if possible as controlled as
possible. This allows you to move forward, without too
many risks, in trial and error mode until a first satisfactory
solution is obtained.
4) Ensure data quality at source
In BI, you reap what you sow or, to put it more lapidary
way: garbage in, garbage out. In other words, if we want
data visualization to be able to communicate the right
messages, make it possible to make informed decisions, to
explore unknown territories, there is one condition to be
met above all: to have quality data entrance.
In return, DataViz improves the quality of the data. First,
because it compels a certain discipline; then, because it also
visualizes... the non-quality of the data. Repeated outliers
may appear at first glance as oddly placed dots, for example.
5) Focus on cooperation between several departments
Another ingredient of success lies in the cooperation
between the actors of the project. DataViz thus contributes
to breaking down the silos that may exist in the company
and contributes to greater cross-functionality.
6) Train the teams
Data visualization does not require side training users.
On the contrary, we can say that it is fully successful
when it is immediately adopted. For this, simplicity and
intuitiveness are essential. But offering a simple rendering
can be extremely complicated. This is why the training of
those who produce the visualizations is an undeniable plus.
7) Using aesthetics as a lever for appropriating informa-
tion
Data visualization cannot be reduced to a representation
aesthetics of data. One can make pretty representations that
are perfectly useless. But that’s not to say that aesthetics
don’t play a role. Used well, it is an essential criterion of
efficiency for DataViz. In this concern to combine aesthetics
and efficiency, companies have every interest in being
imaginative and going beyond traditional Excel-type charts,
if that makes sense.
D. Pitfalls to avoid
If certain good practices maximize the chances of suc-
ceeding in your data visualization project, you can expect,
as with any project, to encounter difficulties such as:
•
The risk of overloading it with information.
•
A general management that does not necessarily
perceive an interest of data visualization immediately.
•
Skepticism about the performance of the tool.
•
A pitfall to avoid: forget your classics: We should not
confuse simplicity with simplism [25].
E. The DataViz’s impact on the relationship between IT and
business lines
Data visualization projects have the particularity, as we
saw previously, of offering great autonomy to users. users.
This is why, in this area, the relationship between IT and the
Professions are set to evolve. It has happened that friction
has arisen, with the IT Department feeling deprived of
some of its prerogatives. These tensions have unfortunately
been maintained by some providers of DataViz solutions by
addressing only the Business Lines without going through
the IT Department to win contracts [26].
Thus, we cannot speak of a loss of prerogatives of the
DSI (Dimensional Strategies Inc.) or the BI teams. Simply,
data visualization raises new questions about how to repre-
sent data, about the distribution of roles and responsibilities
between the business lines and the IT department, and about
how to conduct projects [27].
CIOs understand this. Even those who were initially
reluctant are realizing that data visualization is not a threat,
and are softening their stance [28]. In truth, data visual-
ization is a chance for CIOs and BI teams. On the one
hand, it will relieve them of time-consuming tasks, allowing
them to focus on their missions with higher added value.
On the other hand, they even have a unique opportunity to
invent a new form of BI and relationship with business.
What we can remember is that data visualization, even
if it provides great autonomy to the business lines, is a
question that should interest the IT department and the BI
teams, quite simply because it touches the data. Autonomy
of businesses is useful if it is implemented smartly and if
it allows them to obtain even more value from the CIO
and the BI. Presumably, by accustoming the Professions to
speak the language of data, thanks to graphics, the DataViz
will contribute to the taking of awareness of the value of
data. It can therefore play a role unifier, at the service of
business creation.
5. Which tools for which data visualization?
Information visualization faces increasing hurdles as the
big data era progresses. First of all, the amount of data
that needs to be visualized surpasses the size of the screen.
Second, a typical computer cannot be used to store and
process the data.
A big data visualization solution needs to offer per-
ceptual and performance scalability to solve both of these
issues.
In this section, we will focus on some data visualization
tools for beginners as well as for experienced users.
https://journal.uob.edu.bh/

--- Page 8 ---
1110
R.Mkhinini Gahar, et al.: Open research issues and tools for visualization and big data analytics.
A. Tools accessible to beginners
Tools for beginners are available to allow them to create
DataViz without resorting to programming or its basis and
no expertise is required.
1) Office software and extensions
a) Excel
Excel remains one of the basic tools for data visualiza-
tion [29], [30]. The maximum number of values in a column
is about 1,999,999,997 [31].
Third parties create Excel add-ins to provide Excel
users with extended functionality and save their time and
effort. Developing these add-ins requires coding expertise
in languages such as XML (eXtensible Markup Language)
and VBA (Visual Basic for Applications) and providing an
easy-to-use interface that complements Excel.
Table III overviews some Excel add-ins for DataViz.
Table III overviews some Excel add-ins for DataViz.
b)
LibreOffice
LibreOffice is a free and open-source office suite, de-
rived from the OpenOffice.org project, created and managed
by The Document Foundation. Extensions are provided to
enable various activities, including visualization. LibreOf-
fice extensions are software add-ons that you can install in
addition to the core LibreOffice apps to extend the capability
of the suite in one or all of the programs (Writer, Calc,
Impress, etc.).
Some examples of LibreOffice extensions dedicated to
data visualization can be presented in the table IV.
2) Online office suites
When choosing between data visualization tools, one op-
tion worth considering is Google Sheets. Google’s spread-
sheet application can be used to generate charts, tables, and
even maps that can be embedded in a website. They’re easy
to make and can be configured to update automatically [32].
It’s not for every visualization need. There are some
tasks that need for more intricate data visualization strate-
gies and customisation than what Google Sheets can offer.
Google drive extensions can also help novice users to
perform data visualizations, namely Fusion Tables [33],
Slemma [34], Geckoboard [35], VizyDrop [36], BIME
Analytics [37], Cyfe [38], and Datahero [39], etc.
3) Office 365
Microsoft 365 is made up of the Office suite (Word,
Excel, PowerPoint, Outlook, OneNote, Publisher, and Ac-
cess), as well as a set of online services such as OneDrive,
Exchange Online, SharePoint Online, Teams, and Yammer.
The Office suite allows work in offline mode like a perpetual
suite, which distinguishes it from Office Online, which is
used from a Web browser. The principle of Microsoft 365 is
to be updated as new versions of Office are released [40]. It
provides also some integration apps to visualize your data
in an interpretable, innovative and relevant way. Table V
describes someones highlighting their main functionalities.
4) Simple online tools
a) Tableau
Tableau Public is a free platform for exploring, creating,
and publicly sharing data visualizations online [41].
b) Canva
Unlike other charting tools, Canva is quick and easy.
There’s no learning curve – you’ll have a beautiful graph
or chart in minutes, turning raw data into something visual
and easy to understand [42].
c) Plot.ly
Plotly is an open-source visualization library for data
visualization and analysis. It provides many products in-
cluding Dash, Chart Studio,, a Python framework, R, and
recently JULIA for building fast, easy and powerful analyt-
ical applications. It gives the hand to draw several types of
the graph such as 3D graphs, histograms..., easy to use and
handle, totally free, and very interactive and flexible.
d) PowerBI
Is a data analysis solution from Microsoft. It allows for
the creation of personalized and interactive data visualiza-
tions with a simple interface enough for end users to create
their reports and dashboards [43].
e) Chartblocks
This is an online charting software. It helps to create
basic charts quite quickly and to import more data from
different external sources [44].
f) Periscope Data
Is an effective platform for data analysis. It may compile
all of the company’s data and produce reports. With this
tool, we can quickly transform our data into a report or
graph that is simple to interpret. [45].
For data consumers who frequently need data, Periscope
Data enables analysts to transform their SQL searches into
interactive dashboards, charts, and reports. The ground-
breaking data warehouse technology from Periscope Data
links to your databases in a flash to provide extraordinarily
speedy, low-cost query processing. Workflow hurdles are
removed, and data literacy is promoted throughout your
organization, thanks to unlimited users and no query limits.
[46].
g) Holistics
Is an intelligent data reporting and business intelligence
platform that enables us to resolve our data-related inquiries
and problems without the need for technical support. For
business and data teams, it eliminates the aggravation of re-
quest queues. Holistics allows business users to access their
data without writing SQL (Structured Query Language) or
interfering with data teams. Data teams can create and
manage a set of business KPIs using Holistics [47].
h) Cluvio
It is a cloud-based analytics and BI tool that enables
businesses to use a dashboard to examine data. The solution
enables query execution, results filtering, and data visual-
ization on charts and diagrams. An SQL editor, adaptable
https://journal.uob.edu.bh/

--- Page 9 ---
Int. J. Com. Dig. Sys. 15, No.1, 1103-1117 (Mar-24)
1111
TABLE III. Some Excel add-ins for DataViz.
Add-in
Description
Filled Map
Used to display high-level chart data within a map.
3D-Mapping
A three-dimensional (3D) data visualization tool called Microsoft 3D Maps for Excel enables you to see the data in novel ways.
Bing Maps
With the Bing Maps add-in, Excel users can quickly plot locations and display their data using Bing Maps.
Radial Bar Chart
It displays data from standard bar charts on a circular pattern. With this representation, visual analysis gains the advantages of
both bar charts and circle graphs. The Radial Bar Chart has a distinctive style that makes it a very adaptable representation.
XLMiner Data Visualization App
It instantly visualizes data in your Excel spreadsheet and lets you adjust the variables plotted on each axis, zoom in and out, add
filters to highlight important data, and use textit size by and textit color by categorical variables for quick insights.
TABLE IV. LibreOffice Extensions.
Extension
Description
GeoMap
Inserts map images directly into your document from address information.
GeOOo
His free solution suggests using the LibreOffice tools to create thematic maps.
ClusterRows
A Is a LibreOffice Calc extension that groups rows into clusters and colors the clusters to show them.
OOoHG Gallery
Includes a Gallery that contains 1600 maps, diagrams, and graphs for geography and history organized into 96 categories (in bitmap
and vector graphic format).
OpenStreetMap Presentation
It uses penStreetMap Datas as background for nice presentations.
TABLE V. Data Visualization Apps Integrated with Microsoft 365.
Apps
Description
Workday Adaptive Planning
Is a cloud-based enterprise planning platform that provides modeling, budgeting, and forecasting capabilities to enable firms collaborate
on planning. It offers capabilities like workforce modeling, balance sheets, and spending management, among others.
Coras
It is an enterprise decision management platform suitable for IT, government, legal, and marketing teams. It can be adapted to any type
of business and easily mapped to existing processes and governance.
Microsoft Power BI
It enables the creation of personalized and interactive data visualizations with an interface simple enough for end users to create their
reports and dashboards.
Cyfe
Users can monitor and analyze data spread across all of your web services, including Google Analytics, Salesforce, Google Ads,
MailChimp, Facebook, Twitter, and more, from a single spot in real-time with this all-in-one dashboard software.
DBxtra
It is an ad-hoc reporting and business intelligence system that gives companies the tools to create and distribute unique reports on key
performance indicators. It has capabilities including an Excel reporting service, a report and dashboard designer, online report distribution,
and a report scheduler.
MicroStrategy Analytics
It equips businesspeople with self-service tools to study data and share insights in minutes, enabling them to make quicker, smarter
business decisions.
Kepion
It is a Microsoft BI-powered cloud-based business planning tool. In a single, centralized platform, it combines budgeting, forecasting, BI
reporting, and intuitive modeling technologies, empowering users to create and schedule applications that are tailored to the operations
of their firm.
R scripts, push notifications, customer dashboard sharing,
and more are some of its primary features [48].
i) Klipfolio
is a cloud-based tool for building and sharing real-time
dashboards for use on mobile, TV, and online browsers.
[49].
j) Clicdata
ClicData is a 100% cloud platform. It offers a more
modern vision of the software by offering in particular the
possibility of importing data regardless of their format and
cross-referencing information from different tools [50].
k) Qlik Sense
An effective visualization presents the relationships be-
tween many values and allows you to analyze data at a
glance. Qlik Sense offers a wide range of visualizations and
charts. Each chart excels at visualizing data in various ways
for different purposes. Charts should be selected based on
the data you want to see in them [51].
l) Chartio
With the help of the cloud-based BI and analytics tool
Chartio, users can quickly evaluate data from business apps
and visualize it using a variety of customisable charts. Due
to its straightforward Interactive and SQL modes, Chartio is
appropriate for both professionals and those with no prior
technical knowledge [52].
m) DataWrapper
Another
excellent
tool
for
data
visualization
is
Datawrapper. With DataWrapper, you can simply generate
charts, tables, and maps that are readable on any device.
As a non-commercial platform, Datawrapper is best suited
for schools and small businesses that require simple data
visualization tools [53].
n) Venngage
Venngage is a web application for creating a range of
data visualizations including infographics, posters, reports,
and promotions [54].
https://journal.uob.edu.bh/

--- Page 10 ---
1112
R.Mkhinini Gahar, et al.: Open research issues and tools for visualization and big data analytics.
o) Piktochart
Piktochart is a web-based graphic design tool and info-
graphic maker. We can create bar charts, maps, line graphs,
scatter plots, and more [55]. It can also synchronize with
Google Spreadsheet or SurveyMonkey to retrieve data and
thus create interactive graphs or tables.
p) Infogram
Infogram is a web-based data visualization and in-
fographics platform. It operates as a data visualization
tool to make data easy to understand, discover unknown
facts/outliers/trends, visualize relationship patterns, and ask
better questions.
q) Raw
RAWGraphs is an open-source data visualization plat-
form designed to make it simple for anyone to visualize
complex data. It tries to fill the gap between vector graphics
editors like Adobe Illustrator, Inkscape, and Sketch and
spreadsheet programs like Microsoft Excel, Apple Num-
bers, and OpenRefine [56].
r) Wordle
Wordle is a tool for altering word clouds [57] that
include participation from the Las Vegas 2009 Olympics.
The fundamental advantage of Wordle is that it enables
neighborhood-preserving editing, which retains words in
predictable and nearby areas both during and after editing.
An illustrative example made with wordle for the DataViz
context can be presented in figure 4.
Figure 4. DataViz with Wordle.
s) Easel.ly
People may simply visualize information on Easel.ly by
quickly creating infographics and data visualizations. No
prior design experience is necessary. A tool for designing
infographics called Easelly can turn any visualized content
into any kind of information. It offers a variety of templates,
themes, and objects so users may alter specific details in
their projects [58].
B. Tools accessible to experienced users
1) JavaScript libraries
JavaScript libraries and frameworks facilitate the devel-
opment of websites and applications with a wide range of
features and functionality – all thanks to the dynamic, flexi-
ble and attractive characteristics of JavaScript. According to
a 2020 StackOverflow survey, JavaScript remains the most
widely used programming language (for the 8th grade), with
67.7% of respondents using it. Table VI including the top 15
libraries dedicated to visualization will be able to describe
them better.
2) Dashboard builders
a) Google Data Studio
It is an online application for data visualization that
assists users in transforming data into educative reports
and engaging dashboards. By producing engaging reports
like this one, it is a powerful tool that enables marketers
and business owners to use their data efficiently [59].
In essence, Google Data Studio is a condensed version
of software for data visualization, such as Tableau and
Clickview. Data Studio is not a data source, in contrast
to tools like Google Analytics or HubSpot. It gathers data
from several sources, does analysis on it, and then enables
you to produce interactive reports, charts, and dashboards
rather than collecting the data.
b) Toucan Toco
Is a cloud-based data visualization tool. Intended for
non-technical business executives, the objective of this
highly configurable data visualization solution is to pro-
vide essential information and data for decision-making
[60]. Toucan Toco also develops APIs that allow it to
integrate with other IT solutions, such as Cognos Analytics
and Salesforce. To retrieve the data to be used and then
displayed, this advanced reporting tool is thus able to
connect to more than a hundred applications: Excel, Google
Analytics, and Microsoft SQL Server.
c) Data Hero
DataHero is a cloud computing BI software platform
specializing in data visualization and dashboards. It is the
fastest and easiest way to get insights from data. It offers
the possibilty to create charts, reports, and dashboards from
business data [61].
d) Looker
Is a cloud platform dedicated to data visualization. As
a BI platform, Looker integrates several features, including
many options dedicated to data visualization including the
use of reporting tools, the creation of dashboards, and multi-
cloud storage. Coders can use the LookML language to
program visualization parameters.
6. Data Visualization challenges
An interpretation is necessary before using quantitative
data. Data visualizations combine the meaning of unpro-
cessed data into meaningful conclusions. When designers
put eye-catching visuals ahead of accuracy, the result is
misleading visualizations. In order to convey data in an
ethical manner, designers need to steer clear of common
data visualization errors.
A. Algorithms and data inputs are susceptible to human
error
Because human inputs are fallible, data visualization can
only be as good as the people who provide it. Professionals
who are unaware of the variations in applications may em-
ploy specific algorithms that emphasize specific information
while ignoring other information. They might use a specific
technique as a one-size-fits-all method for visualizing data,
which can result in concepts being misrepresented. Analysts
must take into account what makes each use case distinct
https://journal.uob.edu.bh/

--- Page 11 ---
Int. J. Com. Dig. Sys. 15, No.1, 1103-1117 (Mar-24)
1113
TABLE VI. Top 15 JavaScript Visualization Libraries.
JavaScript Library
Description
D3JS
Best for document modification driven by data.
Charts.js
Best for plotting logarithmic, date, time, or custom scales on sparse and complex datasets.
FusionCharts
For needs in data visualization and charting for web and enterprise applications, it works best.
Taucharts
Ideal for groups creating intricate data displays.
Two.js
Best for a 2-D shape rendering open-source library.
Pts.js
Most effective for assembling items as you view them as points with a simple level of abstraction.
Raphael.js
Best for quickly and efficiently producing intricate drawings and graphics.
Anime.js
Best for producing potent user interface animation that is compatible with all of the main modern browsers.
ReCharts
Best for teams wanting to build charts for web applications based on React.
TradingVue.js
Best for creating complex charts, especially for stock and Forex trading applications on the web.
HighCharts
Best suited for teams needing a large library of charts to serve web and mobile platforms.
ChartKick
Best for producing simple charts using various libraries for programming languages, like Python, Ruby, JS, etc.
Pixi.js
Best for groups searching for JavaScript libraries to produce HTML5-based digital content.
Three.js
Best for creating 3-D visuals for applications on the web.
ZDog
The creation and rendering of 3-D pictures for canvas and SVG are not best for open-sourced software.
and employ a system that can help them achieve their
particular objectives in order to minimize human error.
Additionally, the use of machine learning and artificial
intelligence can aid in lowering the requirement for human
factors.
B. Data oversimplification
To make vast amounts of information easier to under-
stand for viewers, visualizations condense them into simple
graphs, scatter plots, and other visual aids. Because of
this, some professionals have a tendency to oversimplify.
If they concentrate too much on the aesthetic appeal, they
might overlook important details. As a result, viewers
may draw incorrect inferences and conclusions from the
imagery. In the end, this may result in poor decisions, which
could be detrimental to businesses. By enlisting the aid of
data analytics consulting firms, one can guarantee accurate
representation of data while lowering the possibility of
oversimplification.
C. Reliance on visualization is inevitable
Customers are depending more and more on data visu-
alizations to understand their information. They make snap
judgments based on visuals and aesthetics. It’s a simple
and efficient method of learning, and even as technology
develops quickly, it should continue to be applicable. But
in order for businesses to remain competitive, the trend of
consumers depending too much on visualization forces them
to employ analytical tools.
D. Data overload
When working with vast and complicated datasets, re-
searchers frequently face the difficulty of data overload.
This may lead to misunderstandings, annoyance, and mis-
takes in your analysis. How do you make sense of your data
and prevent yourself from being overloaded with informa-
tion? Here are some pointers to assist you in controlling
the amount of data you analyze. In data visualization,
information overload is a prevalent issue. When design-
ers incorporate an increasing number of datasets into the
display, data overload occurs. This makes the visualization
difficult to understand as well as difficult to construct [62].
Lack of attention and prioritizing is a common cause of
information overload. You should take a step back and
assess each data set if you find that you’ve fallen victim
to data overload.
7. DataViz’ issues
A good visualization makes the data easy to understand
so that viewers can rapidly draw conclusions. The inclusion
of excessive information is one of the most frequent errors
in data visualization. It is challenging for viewers to come
up with takeaways because of this. Similar to how visual-
izations suffer from overuse of visual effects by designers.
•
Why are most visualization designs ineffective? Be-
cause they are created for the incorrect audience,
data visualizations frequently lack effectiveness. Poor
end-user communication causes dashboards to lose
some of their apparent usefulness. The audience for
the dashboard must be identified before the data
visualization design process can begin.
•
What mistakes should be avoided in data visual-
ization? Duplicate data, missed data, unmarked NA
values, etc. are examples of common errors. For
instance, the three pie chart sectors in this pie chart
total up to 193%, which is illogical. Your final
visualizations would be useless if the data contained
such inaccuracies.
•
Does data visualization require coding? You may
quickly construct an interactive data visualization
without writing any code. Spreadsheets and reports
with a lot of text are insufficient for effectively
presenting the data we found. This is why data visu-
alization is necessary to show the data in a form that
makes it easier for everyone to understand complex
ideas.
•
Why is misleading data bad? The audience could
not notice the pertinent information if there is too
much material offered or if it is irrelevant. It gets
increasingly challenging to identify specific trends as
there is more data provided at once. The public is
frequently misled using sparse but pertinent material
by over-informing them.
https://journal.uob.edu.bh/

--- Page 12 ---
1114
R.Mkhinini Gahar, et al.: Open research issues and tools for visualization and big data analytics.
•
Can the data be misleading? Due to the sampling
technique employed to collect the data, the results
may be deceptive. For instance, the type and size
of the sample used in any statistic has a significant
bearing on the results. Since many surveys and polls
are directed at specific groups of people who give
particular answers, the sample sizes tend to be tiny
and skewed.
A. How to secure data privacy when sharing visualiza-
tions?
A strong technique to convey patterns, insights, and
narratives from large, complicated data sets is through
data visualization. However, how can you make sure that
unauthorized users cannot access your visualizations and
see private or sensitive data?
Individuals and organizations have the right and obli-
gation to manage the collection, use, and sharing of their
proprietary or personal data. This is known as data privacy.
Data privacy is a business and reputational concern in
addition to a legal and ethical one. You run the risk of
facing legal repercussions, negative consumer feedback, and
reputational harm if you neglect to secure data privacy.
Furthermore, you run the danger of losing the confidence of
your stakeholders, partners, and data providers, which could
have an impact on the availability and quality of your data.
Anonymizing data prior to visualizing it helps protect
data privacy. In this procedure, any identifiers—such as
names, addresses, phone numbers, or email addresses—that
could be used to connect data to particular individuals
or entities are either hidden or removed. A variety of
techniques can be used to anonymize data, including sub-
stituting random or pseudonymous values for identifiers,
aggregating or summarizing data at a finer level of detail,
introducing noise or distortion to value data, choosing or
sampling a subset of data, and switching or combining data
values between records.
One practical method for guaranteeing data confiden-
tiality is data encryption. This entails converting data into
an encoded format that is only readable or accessible by
individuals with the proper authorization and a decryption
key or password. Data can be encrypted using a variety
of techniques, including applying encryption algorithms or
software, utilizing secure protocols or platforms, and incor-
porating encryption functions or libraries into encryption
tools. visualization, as well as securing visualization outputs
with a password or access control. All of these techniques
can aid in preventing unwanted access to sensitive data.
B. AI’s impact on data visualisation Work
Thanks to technology advancements, data visualization
once restricted to simple graphs and tables now has a
far more sophisticated aspect. As it positions itself as a
major catalyst, artificial intelligence reveals new methods
for accurately representing and interpreting the vast amount
of information at our disposal. The nexus between Artificial
Intelligence (AI) and visualization goes beyond a straight-
forward display; it is revolutionizing our comprehension and
utilization of data [62].
In terms of theory and consulting, Chat Generative Pre-
trained Transformer (ChatGPT) still needed improvement
because it was still prone to errors and lacked in-depth
knowledge. In spite of this, it’s still amazing how quickly
and accurately it could respond in writing to my question.
On the DataViz coding side was where ChatGPT truly
excelled. We can ask ChatGPT to generate the code for a
specific chart in multiple languages or libraries, and it will
be as simple as that. In order to alter the code’s appearance
or functionality, we can also ask it to update certain parts
of it. Even broken code can be fixed by ChatGPT, which
can also tell you what went wrong [63], [64].
What effect will ChatGPT and similar AI tools have on
DataViz work in the future, though, if they keep getting
better? The way we retrieve information from the internet
could already be revolutionized by the ChatGPT interface
[65], [66]. To what extent, then, would AI tools disrupt the
data visualization industry? In the following table VII, some
educated guesses about what could take place in the future
because of the AI.
8. Conclusions and limitations
With the development of smart technologies that gen-
erate astronomical amounts of data, data visualization be-
comes essential. Indeed, in order to be able to analyze your
Big Data and make the best use of it in your business
strategy, it is essential to be able to read it and list your
business information in visual dashboards.
By classifying, segmenting and scripting data visually,
a business can uncover previously inaccessible information
at a glance. Data visualization therefore allows any organi-
zation to manage its activity more efficiently by adopting
a data-driven and agile strategy. If data visualization was
important a few years ago, it is crucial today. In the era
of Big Data, it makes it possible to make sense of the
billions of data that a company can collect every day and
which, before this transformation process, are presented in
separate lines and are therefore not easily exploitable. Data
visualization is a very important task nowadays for data
scientists. The main reason for recourse is decision-making.
An interpretable, relevant, and innovative visualization can
lead to the right decision for a company knowing that
this decision could be radical. Conventional visualization
techniques cannot handle the enormous volume, variety, and
velocity of data. To do this, several tools have emerged and
are constantly evolving.
Therefore, modeling large data is a useful topic right
now, among other things. Data modeling is actually a
process that gives businesses access to a simple graphical
user interface for finding, designing, visualizing, standard-
izing, and deploying high-quality data assets. Now, a sound
data model acts as a guide for creating and implementing
https://journal.uob.edu.bh/

--- Page 13 ---
Int. J. Com. Dig. Sys. 15, No.1, 1103-1117 (Mar-24)
1115
TABLE VII. Some educated guesses about what the future may bring negatively.
AI’s DataViz issue
Description
Potential Job Losses
Several artists were upset when an AI-generated image won an art competition last year.
With a description in natural language, DALL-E and its offspring can produce realistic-looking artwork and images.
Resource Websites Tools Redundancy
Perhaps as our methods of information acquisition change, AI tools will lessen the significance of webpages.
Perhaps articles, blog posts, brochure websites, and even Wikipedia pages will become much less popular.
A Deluge of Mediocrity
This isn’t unique to DataViz, but AI may have a very detrimental impact on the caliber of web content.
There will probably be a spike in the quantity of AI-generated content available online as these tools enable faster and simpler
content production.
It’s possible that online content created by AI will eventually surpass that created by humans.
Fake Data Visualisation
We might observe AI producing a ton of charts in the field of data visualization to further a cause.
We learned how ChatGPT can create fake data in the previous post. Therefore, it is not out of the question that AI could create
charts in large quantities using fictitious datasets. Even if a source is included at the bottom of the chart, it’s possible that it was
created entirely by AI to deceive those who were unwilling to look further.
Impact on Design Decisions
Over the last ten or so years, there has been a noticeable decline in attention spans.
The growing appeal of Tiktok and YouTube shorts, particularly among younger audiences, makes this evident.
It is unfortunate to say that if this trend keeps up, it will definitely affect how people look for and consume content that is data-focused.
databases that use higher-quality data sources to enhance
application development and help users make wiser deci-
sions [67]. So, we will be interested in big data modeling
systems.
References
[1]
K. T. Torphy, D. L. Brandon, A. J. Daly, K. A. Frank, C. Greenhow,
S. Hu, and M. Rehm, “Social media, education, and digital democ-
ratization,” Teachers College Record, vol. 122, no. 6, pp. 1–7, 2020.
[2]
M. Walter, R. Lovett, B. Maher, B. Williamson, J. Prehn, G. Bodkin-
Andrews, and V. Lee, “Indigenous data sovereignty in the era of big
data and open data,” Australian Journal of Social Issues, vol. 56,
no. 2, pp. 143–156, 2021.
[3]
R. Mkhinini Gahar, A. Hidri, and M. Sassi Hidri, “Let’s predict
who will move to a new job,” CoRR, vol. abs/2309.08333, 2023.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2309.08333
[4]
M. Sassi Hidri, S. A. Alsaif, and A. Hidri, “Performance analysis
of machine learning algorithms on networks intrusion detection,”
Int. J. Comput. Appl. Technol., vol. 70, no. 3/4, pp. 285–295, 2022.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1504/IJCAT.2022.10056028
[5]
S. A. Alsaif, A. Hidri, and M. Sassi Hidri, “Towards inferring
influential facebook users,” Comput., vol. 10, no. 5, p. 62, 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.3390/computers10050062
[6]
——, “Stacking-based modelling for improved over-indebtedness
predictions,” Int. J. Comput. Appl. Technol., vol. 69, no. 3, pp.
273–281, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1504/IJCAT.
2022.10052783
[7]
M. A. Zoghlami, M. Sassi Hidri, and R. Ben Ayed, “Sampling-
based consensus fuzzy clustering on big data,” in 2016 IEEE
International Conference on Fuzzy Systems, FUZZ-IEEE 2016,
Vancouver, BC, Canada, July 24-29, 2016.
IEEE, 2016, pp.
1501–1508.
[8]
R. Mkhinini Gahar, O. Arfaoui, M. Sassi Hidri, and N. Ben Hadj-
Alouane, “An ontology-driven mapreduce framework for association
rules
mining
in
massive
data,”
in
Knowledge-Based
and
Intelligent
Information
&
Engineering
Systems:
Proceedings
of the 22nd International Conference KES-2018, Belgrade, Serbia,
3-5 September 2018, ser. Procedia Computer Science, R. J. Howlett,
L. C. Jain, Z. Popovic, D. B. Popovic, S. N. Vukosavic, C. Toro,
and Y. Hicks, Eds., vol. 126.
Elsevier, 2018, pp. 224–233.
[9]
G. Manogaran, D. Lopez, C. Thota, K. M. Abbas, S. Pyne, and
R. Sundarasekar, “Big data analytics in healthcare internet of
things,” in Innovative healthcare systems for the 21st century.
Springer, 2017, pp. 263–284.
[10]
R. Mkhinini Gahar, O. Arfaoui, M. Sassi Hidri, and N. Ben Hadj-
Alouane, “A distributed approach for high-dimensionality heteroge-
neous data reduction,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 151 006–151 022,
2019.
[11]
Z. M. Khalid, S. R. Zeebaree et al., “Big data analysis for data
visualization: A review,” International Journal of Science and
Business, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 64–75, 2021.
[12]
A. Lensen, B. Xue, and M. Zhang, “Genetic programming for
evolving a front of interpretable models for data visualization,” IEEE
transactions on cybernetics, vol. 51, no. 11, pp. 5468–5482, 2020.
[13]
F. Skender, V. Manevska, I. Hristoski, and N. Rendevski, “Investiga-
tion of dataviz as a big data visualization tool,” in International Sym-
posium on Intelligent Manufacturing and Service Systems. Springer,
2023, pp. 469–478.
[14]
A. M. S. R. N. Ibeh, “Dataviz design: A study of intentions,” in 46
th CONFERENCE, 2023, p. 392.
[15]
M. Friendly, “The golden age of statistical graphics,” Statistical
Science, pp. 502–535, 2008.
[16]
T. Morita, “Reflection on the development of the tool kits of
bertin’s methods,” Cartography and Geographic Information Sci-
ence, vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 140–151, 2019.
[17]
P. Organisciak, B. M. Schmidt, and J. S. Downie, “Giving shape
to large digital libraries through exploratory data analysis,” Journal
of the Association for Information Science and Technology, vol. 73,
no. 2, pp. 317–332, 2022.
[18]
S. Jung, R. Xiao, O. Buruk, and J. Hamari, “Designing gaming
wearables: From participatory design to concept creation,” in Pro-
ceedings of the Fifteenth International Conference on Tangible,
Embedded, and Embodied Interaction, 2021, pp. 1–14.
[19]
L. Zhang, B. Vinodhini, and T. Maragatham, “Interactive iot data
visualization for decision making in business intelligence,” Arabian
Journal for Science and Engineering, pp. 1–11, 2021.
[20]
T. U. Nærland and M. Engebretsen, “Towards a critical under-
standing of data visualisation in democracy: a deliberative systems
approach,” Information, Communication & Society, pp. 1–19, 2021.
https://journal.uob.edu.bh/

--- Page 14 ---
1116
R.Mkhinini Gahar, et al.: Open research issues and tools for visualization and big data analytics.
[21]
P. Raineri and F. Molinari, “Innovation in data visualisation for
public policy making,” in The Data Shake.
Springer, Cham, 2021,
pp. 47–59.
[22]
J. B. Holbrook, “Open science, open access, and the democratization
of knowledge,” Issues in Science and Technology, vol. 35, no. 3, pp.
26–28, 2019.
[23]
S. Sarica, B. Yan, G. Bulato, P. Jaipurkar, and J. Luo, “Data-driven
network visualization for innovation and competitive intelligence,”
in Proceedings of the 52nd Hawaii International Conference on
System Sciences, 2019.
[24]
C. Burnett, G. Merchant, and I. Guest, “Destabilising data: The
use of creative data visualisation to generate professional dialogue,”
British Educational Research Journal, vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 105–127,
2021.
[25]
F. Deng, Z. Zhang, J. Zhang, and D. Zhang, “Building extraction
from multiple images and lidar data,” in Proceedings of the Interna-
tional conference on SAR and Multispectral Image Processing, vol.
6043, 2005, pp. 515–520.
[26]
R. Grant, “Pretty persuasion: The advantages of data visualisation,”
Impact, vol. 2019, no. 2, pp. 19–23, 2019.
[27]
S. Graessley, P. Suler, T. Kliestik, and E. Kicova, “Industrial big data
analytics for cognitive internet of things: wireless sensor networks,
smart computing algorithms, and machine learning techniques,”
Analysis and Metaphysics, vol. 18, pp. 23–29, 2019.
[28]
O. Santolalla, “Dataviz,” in Rock the Tech Stage.
Springer, 2020,
pp. 33–49.
[29]
H. Oike, Y. Ogawa, and K. Oishi, “Simple and quick visualization
of periodical data using microsoft excel,” Methods and protocols,
vol. 2, no. 4, p. 81, 2019.
[30]
N. Akhtar, N. Tabassum, A. Perwej, and Y. Perwej, “Data analytics
and visualization using tableau utilitarian for covid-19 (coron-
avirus),” Global Journal of Engineering and Technology Advances,
vol. 3, pp. 28–50, 2020.
[31]
S. Hiljazi and T. Curtis, “Developing an introductory class in
business intelligence (bi) using ms excel powerpivot.” Association
Supporting Computer Users in Education, 2018.
[32]
J. Dougherty and I. Ilyankou, Hands-On Data Visualization.
”
O’Reilly Media, Inc.”, 2021.
[33]
J. Doshi, A. Goradia, and D. Mistry, “A review of google data
visualization tools,” International Journal of Current Engineering
and Technology, vol. 4, no. 5, pp. 3134–3138, 2014.
[34]
J. A. S. Cardona and D. A. A. Garcia, “Evaluaci´on y selecci´on
de herramientas de anal´ıtica visual para su implementaci´on en una
instituci´on de educaci´on superior,” Revista IngEam, vol. 4, no. 1,
pp. 1–20, 2017.
[35]
D. Orlovskyi, A. Kopp, and V. Kondratiev, “Using dashboards for
the business processes status analysis,” 2019.
[36]
M. Minelli, M. Chambers, and A. Dhiraj, Big data, big analytics:
emerging business intelligence and analytic trends for today’s
businesses.
John Wiley & Sons, 2013, vol. 578.
[37]
M. H. u. Rehman, V. Chang, A. Batool, and T. Y. Wah, “Big data
reduction framework for value creation in sustainable enterprises,”
Int. J. Inf. Manag., vol. 36, no. 6, p. 917–928, dec 2016.
[38]
H. Oliv´er, “K´ıs´erleti gy´art´ashoz kapcsol´od´o adatvizualiz´aci´os fe-
jleszt´es a purt´ar rendszerben,” Multidiszciplin´aris Tudom´anyok,
vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 238–252, 2020.
[39]
T. P. Atwood and R. Reznik-Zellen, “Using the visualization soft-
ware evaluation rubric to explore six freely available visualization
applications,” Journal of eScience Librarianship, vol. 7, no. 1, 2018.
[40]
K. Wilson, “Microsoft office 365,” in Using office 365.
Springer,
2014, pp. 1–14.
[41]
H. Kennedy and W. Allen, “Data visualisation as an emerging tool
for online research,” The Sage handbook of online research methods,
pp. 307–326, 2016.
[42]
M. Kaufmann, “Big data management canvas: A reference model
for value creation from data,” Big Data and Cognitive Computing,
vol. 3, no. 1, 2019.
[43]
N. C. Viorel and N. Lucia, “Analysis of information on tourism in
the european union using the power bi business analysis service.”
Agricultural Management/Lucrari Stiintifice Seria I, Management
Agricol, vol. 21, no. 1, 2019.
[44]
S. A. Fahad and A. E. Yahya, “Big data visualization: allotting by
R and python with GUI tools,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Smart Computing and Electronic Enterprise,
2018, pp. 1–8.
[45]
S. N. Pattanaik and R. P. Wiegand, “Data visualization,” Handbook
of Human Factors and Ergonomics, pp. 893–946, 2021.
[46]
J. Richardson, R. Sallam, K. Schlegel, A. Kronz, and J. Sun, “Magic
quadrant for analytics and business intelligence platforms,” Gartner
ID G00386610, 2020.
[47]
S. Khan, “Data visualization to explore the countries dataset for
pattern creation,” International Journal of Online & Biomedical
Engineering, vol. 17, no. 13, 2021.
[48]
G. Srivastava and R. Venkataraman, “A review of the state of the art
in business intelligence software,” Enterprise Information Systems,
vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 1–28, 2022.
[49]
A. M. Amer and M. M. El-Hadi, “Tableau big data visualization
tool in the higher education institutions for sustainable development
goals,” International Journal of Computer Science and Mobile
Computing, 2019.
[50]
I. Viljanen, “Improving solutions for analytics services in a mid-
sized insurance company,” 2020.
[51]
V. Vashisht and P. Dharia, “Integrating chatbot application with
qlik sense business intelligence (BI) tool using natural language
processing (NLP),” in Micro-Electronics and Telecommunication
Engineering.
Springer, 2020, pp. 683–692.
[52]
G. Sedrakyan, J. Malmberg, K. Verbert, S. J¨arvel¨a, and P. A.
Kirschner, “Linking learning behavior analytics and learning science
concepts: Designing a learning analytics dashboard for feedback to
support learning regulation,” Computers in Human Behavior, vol.
107, p. 105512, 2020.
[53]
M. Islam and S. Jin, “An overview of data visualization,” in
https://journal.uob.edu.bh/

--- Page 15 ---
Int. J. Com. Dig. Sys. 15, No.1, 1103-1117 (Mar-24)
1117
Proceedings of the International Conference on Information Science
and Communications Technologies (ICISCT), 2019, pp. 1–7.
[54]
T. Usova and R. Laws, “Teaching a one-credit course on data literacy
and data visualisation.” Journal of Information Literacy, vol. 15,
no. 1, 2021.
[55]
S. K. Peddoju and H. Upadhyay, “Evaluation of iot data visualization
tools and techniques,” in Data visualization.
Springer, 2020, pp.
115–139.
[56]
M. Mauri, T. Elli, G. Caviglia, G. Uboldi, and M. Azzi, “Rawgraphs:
a visualisation platform to create open outputs,” in Proceedings of
the 12th biannual conference on Italian SIGCHI, 2017, pp. 1–5.
[57]
F. B. Viegas, M. Wattenberg, and J. Feinberg, “Participatory vi-
sualization with wordle,” IEEE transactions on visualization and
computer graphics, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 1137–1144, 2009.
[58]
A. Weiner and K. Lorber, “Infographics: A methodology for student
research presentations and other academic projects,” in Proceedings
of the International Conference on Society for Information Technol-
ogy & Teacher Education.
Association for the Advancement of
Computing in Education (AACE), 2021, pp. 649–652.
[59]
M. Serik, G. Nurbekova, and M. Mukhambetova, “Optimal organisa-
tion of a big data training course: big data processing with bigquery
and setting up a dataproc hadoop framework,” World Trans. on
Engng. and Technol. Educ, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 417–422, 2021.
[60]
B. Arruabarrena, “L’expert en dataviz, un m´etier en transition,” I2D-
Information, donn´ees documents, vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 7–8, 2017.
[61]
A. M. Pedersen and C. Bossen, “Data work in healthcare: An
ethnography of a bi unit,” in Proceedings of the 8th International
Conference on Infrastructures in Healthcare. European Society for
Socially Embedded Technologies (EUSSET), 2021.
[62]
R. Rozi´c, R. Sliˇskovi´c, and M. Rosi´c, “Artificial intelligence for
knowledge visualization: An overview,” in International Conference
on Digital Transformation in Education and Artificial Intelligence
Application.
Springer, 2023, pp. 118–131.
[63]
B. Kovalerchuk, K. Nazemi, R. Andonie, N. Datia, and E. Banissi,
Integrating Artificial Intelligence and Visualization for Visual
Knowledge Discovery.
Springer, 2022.
[64]
C. Conner, J. Samuel, M. Garvey, Y. Samuel, and A. Kretinin, “Con-
ceptual frameworks for big data visualization: Discussion of models,
methods, and artificial intelligence for graphical representations of
data,” in Handbook of Research for Big Data.
Apple Academic
Press, 2022, pp. 197–234.
[65]
A. Lavanya, S. Sindhuja, L. Gaurav, and W. Ali, “A comprehensive
review of data visualization tools: Features, strengths, and weak-
nesses,” 2023.
[66]
N. W. Kim, G. Myers, and B. Bach, “How good is chatgpt
in giving advice on your visualization design?” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.09617, 2023.
[67]
R. Mkhinini Gahar, O. Arfaoui, and M. Sassi Hidri, “Towards big
data modeling and management systems: From DBMS to BDMS,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Advanced
Systems and Emergent Technologies (IC ASET), 2023, pp. 1–6.
Rania
Mkhinini
Gahar
was
born
in
M’Saken, Sousse, Tunisia. She received the
Engineering degree from the Higher Insti-
tute of Applied Sciences and Technology
of Sousse, Tunisia, in 2013, the master’s
degree and the Ph.D degree from the Na-
tional Engineering School of Tunis, Tunisia,
respectively in 2015 and 2021. She is a
member of the OASIS Research Lab with
the National School of Engineers of Tunis.
Her research interests include big data analytics, as well as data
science and statistical machine learning.
Olfa Arfaoui was born in Bou Arada,
Seliana, Tunisia. She received the Engi-
neering degree in computer science from
the National School of Engineering of Tu-
nis (ENIT), Tunis, EL Manar University,
Tunisia, in 2007, and the Ph.D. degree from
ENIT, Tunisia, in 2014. She is currently
an Assistant Professor with the University
of Carthage, Tunisia. Her research activities
focus on clustering, XML native databases,
flexible querying, big data analytics, as well as data science.
Minyar Sassi Hidri was born in Nabeul,
Tunisia. She received the degree in computer
science engineering and the Ph.D. degree
from the National Engineering School of
Tunis (ENIT), Tunis El Manar University,
Tunisia, in 2003 and 2007, respectively. She
obtained the Qualification to lead researches
in computer sciences from Tunis El Manar
University, Tunisia, in June 2014. She is
currently an Associate Professor with ENIT,
Tunisia, and an Assistant Professor with the Imam Abdulrahman
Bin Faisal University, Dammam, Saudi Arabia, since September
2017. Her experience in teaching, in computer science and infor-
mation systems is around 20 years. Her research interests include
combinatorial aspects in Big Data analytics, machine learning,
deep learning, and text mining, with over 65 publications. She
is also a member of the steering committee of many international
conferences and a reviewer of impacted journals.
https://journal.uob.edu.bh/
